---
title: "Master Thesis"
collection: Material and projects
type: "publication"
permalink: "/material-and-projects/master-thesis"
venue: "---"
date: "1/1/1"
paperurl: 'http://urlfasullo.it'
location: "University of California Los Angeles"
---

In 2020 I worked on my [Master Thesis](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/simone-bombari/simone-bombari.github.io/4d2858b8196f66268f5958d7d975e3783b0782e9/files/master_thesis.pdf) as a Visiting Graduate Researcher at the University of California Los Angeles, supervised by [Stefano Soatto](http://web.cs.ucla.edu/~soatto/) and [Alessandro Achille](https://alexachi.github.io/).

# Abstract

In the thriving field of deep learning, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the most common algorithm when it comes to training deep neural networks. While SGD has been introduced to speed up the optimization of models trained on large datasets, recent studies have shown that it actually plays a pivotal role in ensuring that the network finds solutions that generalize well on unseen data. This connection is of extreme importance since the performance of supervised learning models is (in practice) measured with their ability to generalize their "knowledge" to new data. A better understanding of the implications of the optimization algorithms on generalization can be the key to further improve the outstanding achievements machine learning has reached in the last few years.


On the other hand, the deep learning optimization community has also observed how this generalization ability is strongly related to the flatness of the loss landscape in the point the algorithm converged to. In fact, experiments show that SGD is more likely to converge to flat minima, unlike its deterministic counterpart, GD. However, a full mathematical treatment of why this happens is still missing, due to the high complexity of the optimization dynamics generated by SGD. In this work we try to build a mathematical model able to clarify this phenomenon, using a variation of the Eyring-Kramers law, a formula used in chemistry and physics to describe the mean transition time of a Brownian particle between local minima in a potential landscape.


Later, we discuss the validity of the continuous approach for these purposes, showing how the SGD dynamics does not fulfill the necessary requirements for our architecture, since it is substantially a strongly discrete process.
This result casts doubts on the validity of continuous-time approximation commonly used to analyze SGD dynamics through the theory of stochastic differential equations.


We finally try, with empirical experiments, to better investigate the loss landscape and the SGD trajectory of a real training process on a real neural network. We are therefore able to get an overview of the loss landscape topology, that we claim is in analogy with a tower of colanders. Aware of this new point of view, we get and describe some curious relations between the loss landscape and the two most relevant optimization parameters, the learning rate, and the batch size. In particular, we find a natural constraint between the loss and the highest eigenvalue of its Hessian, meaning that we cannot achieve low values of the loss function, without entering in narrow areas of the landscape.
